The Joe Rogan experience.
So you're in this position where you have this information and you, you know,
that these surveillance systems are in place and they're unconstitutional
and you feel this deep responsibility to let the American people know about
this. What, what makes you take the Lee?
So this is, um, covered, uh, extensively in the book,
um, because it took a long time. I would imagine.
People.
People, you know. Yeah. Right. Exactly.
People like to think it's like a cinematic moment, um,
where I find this golden document, like this seller wind report,
and that's the closest thing to a smoking gun, right. That, that exists.
But look, if you found that you, you can read that later, look at that and like,
imagine yourself being like, oh,
I'm gonna go outside on the courthouse steps and wave this thing and burn my
life to the ground, burn my family to the ground. I'm never gonna be work again.
Uh, I'm going to jail for the rest of my life. Um,
the question is what would it take for you, uh,
to light a match and burn your life to the ground? Um,
and for a long time, uh, too long, um,
the answer was nothing and I'm, I'm, I'm ashamed at that. Uh, it took me,
uh, so long, uh,
to get over that home because I was waiting for somebody else to do it. Uh,
when I saw, uh, people like Ron widen on this, uh,
when I saw people like the court case that I showed before,
where people were actively challenging these programs, right.
Journalists had the scent of it. Uh, and you know,
there are a lot of people who are gonna be in, you know,
the YouTube comments or whatever, and go, oh, I knew this was happening. No,
you didn't. Well, bill bimney.
You had.
He, uh.
Bill bennyney. Yeah. Bill, bill BI, excuse me, bill. Bennyney.
He initially was the one that came out and spoke about this issue.
And so.
Yeah, bill Biney, uh, is, uh, part of,
shall we say the group of early NSA whistleblowers who came with Thomas Drake?
Uh, bill Benny, uh, Kirk Webe I believe in ed Loomis, uh,
and these guys all got their doors kicked in, you know, they, they got harassed,
um, by the FBI, Tom Drake, uh, who was a senior executive at the NSA.
This is guy who had a lot to lose, um,
was charged under the same law was the espionage act.
And these guys who were doing it earlier during the Bush administration,
some of 'em were talking to the journalists, uh, that didn't, you know,
maybe it's alleged, I don't wanna put them on the spot. Maybe they deny it.
Maybe they don't leave that to them. Um, but uh,
somebody somewhere was informing this reporting, right?
It got into the New York times about the Bush era warrantless wire tapping
program. And eventually journalists put this out there.
People knew these capabilities existed. Um, but yeah, then,
then there's the person in the YouTube comment. So it's like, oh,
we knew all about this. It's nothing new.
And the thing is you can know about some programs and not know about others.
You can have a suspicion,
you can know with a certainty that this stuff is capable or is, is possible.
The capability exists.
You can know that the government has done this stuff in the past.
You can know they are likely to do it again. You can have all these indications,
you can have, um, like the Juul versus NSA case. Uh that's um,
run by the E EF F, which is about the at,
or it's about at and T setting up, uh, secret rooms in their,
uh, telecommunications facilities where they basically drag, uh,
all the fibers for their domestic internet, uh,
communications and like phone communications into a room that's purpose built
for the NSA, and then they've bring it out. Um, but at, and T denies,
it's the NSA, uh, the NSA denies that these things, uh,
happen or that are done at all. Right. And so this is the context, uh,
you say, you know, and, you know, let, put it the other way. Maybe you do know,
right. Maybe you are, uh, an academic researcher, uh,
maybe you're technological special list. Uh,
maybe you're just somebody who reads all the reporting and you actually know,
uh, you can't prove it, but you know, this is going on,
but that's the thing in a democracy,
the distance between speculation and fact,
the distance between what you know and what you can prove to everybody else in
the country is everything in our model of government, because what, you know,
doesn't matter what matters is what we all know.
And the only way we can all know it is if somebody can prove it,
if you can prove it. And if you don't have the evidence, you can't prove it.
And of course, when we talk about the earlier stuff, right, like the sort, uh,
a more corporatized media,
they've got a thousand and incentives not to get involved in this stuff.
They need access to the white house.
They need these officials to sit down with them, uh, and give interviews, right?
That's constant content that they need that's access that they need,
they need to be taken seriously. They need to be, uh, you know, uh,
admitted to briefers, uh, it is a co-dependent relationship and yet,
uh, and rather,
and so the only way to make sure people understand this broadly
is if we all work together, right. Um,
if we collectively can establish a Corpus of evidence, right.
A body of facts that is so large and so
persuasive, it overcomes, uh,
the natural and understandable resistance of the,
these more corporatized media groups. Um, it overcomes, uh,
the political and partisan, uh, sort of loyalties that, that all of these, uh,
political factions in the country do, where they go, you know, it's,
it's my present in it. Even if I don't like this stuff,
even if I don't agree with this stuff, I don't wanna say it exists.
I wanna deny it until it's proved, you know, uh,
<laugh> in HD on video, you know, signing the order to do this,
that or the other. Um,
because otherwise there's a chance my guy might not get reelected and that's the
only way this kind of stuff can happen.
And the sad fact is the opportunities that we have to prove
this, like the, the moments in history where we do prove something, anything,
uh, beyond a reasonable doubt are so few, uh, and,
and so rare that they almost always only come from whistle blowers.
Uh, and, and I think that's, uh, one of the problems that we have, uh,
particularly in the, the climate movement did, uh, today look, EV go ahead.
I'm sorry. Did you take any comfort from knowing that Obama,
when he was running for office and in his hope and change,
he had provisions to protect whistle blowers and provisions to
<laugh> to reward people, right? I mean,
do you remember all that mean it was eventually redacted or eventually deleted
it from the website <laugh>, but that disappeared it from the,
but that was a big part of his program.
What he was running on was that people were exposing unlawful activity.
He was gonna protect those people. Did that,
did you take any comfort in that mom also.
Campaigned? Well, Obama also, uh, during his campaign said, uh,
he campaigned actively against the warrantless wire tapping the Bush
administration, because remember Bush is in the scandal,
the height of this on 2007, you know, the election's coming up right after,
and he's going, uh, Obama's saying, uh, you know,
that's not who we are, right. That's not what we do. Um,
and yet within a hundred days of him becoming a president, uh,
now he's sitting in that chair rather than extinguishing these programs,
he embraces them. And why do you.
Think that is a more entrenched?
I think it's actually, uh, again, what we talked about earlier, first thing, uh,
every time a new president comes into the white house, uh,
they get their clearances, right? They get read into all this stuff. Uh,
during the campaign, they get clearances and they get written and stuff,
but when they finally become president right now,
they're the only people who can sign what these are called,
the covert action findings and things like that, um, which are basically,
you know, the intelligence community wants to assassinate somebody.
They wanna run this illegal program here, there or everywhere. Um,
and they can't do it because they're executive agencies without that top level
executive sign off. So they gotta open the vest, right.
They gotta get these guys on, on side. Um,
and basically every president, uh, since Kennedy,
um, they have been successful in, uh, what they call fearing up, uh,
where as soon as they come in, uh, they lead,
you read you the litany of horribles and they go, these are all the threats, uh,
that we're facing. And let's be real. It is a dangerous world. Uh,
it's not just all made up BS. Uh,
some of it is right where it's inflated. It's not that it's completely false,
but they make it sound more serious than it actually is. Um,
but there are real bad people out there who are trying to do real bad things.
And you have just gone through a hellish election, um, because our,
our electoral politics are so diseased. Um, and,
uh, now after you've crawled through fire,
you're already thinking four years ahead, you know, how,
how do I stay in this seat? And these guys are basically saying, uh,
if you don't do X, Y, and Z,
this is gonna fall on your lap and the implication, which I,
I don't think they actually say, but every president knows, uh,
is these guys can undermine you to death. Um, if got the IC,
uh, against you, right? Uh, they can Stonewall you.
They can put out stories that are gonna be problematic for you, uh, every day,
your presidency. Um, and it's,
it's not that it's necessarily gonna gonna cash you outta the white house,
but it's a problem that is a president. You very much don't want. Uh,
so in the most charitable interpretation of this,
you've got a new guy coming in in Obama's case. This is a pretty young guy. Um,
doesn't focus in this kind of national, uh,
security forum policy stuff throughout his earlier career.
He's more interested in domestic policy and always has been,
that's actually one of the positive things to say about Barack Obama. Um,
he's just trying to make things better home. And now suddenly they go, look,
you need to worry about this country.
You need to worry about this group that you've never heard of.
You need to worry about, you know, this technology,
you need to do all this stuff. Uh,
and the only reason we can tell you this stuff,
and the only thing dividing America and the abyss
are these terrible, terrible, terrible, terrible programs, right. Uh,
that are in fact wonderful things because they keep back the darkness.
And so here's, here's the, the, the real problem. Uh,
every president hears that. And every president, you know, first off,
they've got so many other things to do is they,
they just kind of nod their head and they'll go,
I'll deal with this later in my administration. And this,
this is one of the ironies, uh, when I come, came forward in 2013, right.
This is now Barack Obama's second term president. Uh,
one of the responses that they had to the mass surveillance scandal was yes,
we think they went a little too far.
This is after the initial thing where they went,
nobody's listening to your phone calls, you know, uh, just made data, right?
Nobody, nobody can have, uh,
perfect privacy and also have perfect security.
So we gotta sort of divide a line here between <laugh> the constitution and you
know, what the government wants to do. Um, but they said, uh,
we were gonna get to it. We knew these programs were problematic,
but if they just gave us more time, we would've fixed them.
Maybe it's true. Right. Seems,
seems awful convenient in hindsight that throughout the entirety of the first
term, well, it seems like what you would say if you got caught <laugh> right,
right, right, right. Um, but look, uh, in,
if we're being the most generous, uh, that we are here,
the president is briefed on real and legitimate threats and they scare
the hell out of 'em I'm sure. Um, and we can, we can all imagine being there,
right? Those,
those of us who remember what the world like post nine 11 fear is a powerful
thing, but the guys who are doing that briefing,
they're no longer scared of it. Uh,
because they've been dealing with this for years.
This is the oldest thing they've given this briefing times before. You know,
when we talk about people talk about the deep state, right? They, they,
they talk about it like some conspiracy of lizard people in it.
It's not that it's something much simpler.
The deep state is simply the career government.
It's the people who are in the same offices who outlive and outlast
presidencies. Right. They've seen Republicans, they've seen Democrats,
they don't really care. Uh, and they give that same briefing again and again,
and they get good at it. They know what they want. Uh,
know what this person's saying. Uh, where's the president. They,
they don't know who these people are. Uh, the,
these people have been there before the president.
They're gonna be there after the president. Uh,
and so they give this very effective, uh, very fear inducing speech.
And then they followed up with their asks, which are really demands, um,
just politely put vied, uh,
and anyone in that position who is not an expert on this stuff, uh,
who is not ready for this, uh, uh,
sort of trade off and who you have to understand as a career politician is
entirely used to the horse trading game, right.
And going I'll deal with this later or not now, or, uh, what are the,
this is the cost benefit here. And the intelligence community goes,
if you give us what we want,
no one will ever know about it because it's classified.
It's obviously the easy answer. Uh, and maybe, uh,
Barack Obama honestly, did want to get to this later.
But what we can say today is, uh, uh, uh,
for all the good that may have been done in that white house, uh,
this is an issue where the president went through two full terms and did not
fix the problem, but in fact, made it worse.
Yeah.